>> Ifill: PROTESTS ERUPT
NATIONWIDE, AMERICANS CHANTING
"WE CAN'T BREATHE," AND MARCHING
ON THE STREETS AFTER A GRAND
JURY IN NEW YORK VOTES NO
INDICTMENT FOR THE POLICE
OFFICER WHO KILLED ERIC GARNER.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
JUDY WOODRUFF IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD THIS THURSDAY:
WE GO TO THE SCENE OF GARNER'S
DEATH IN STATEN ISLAND, WHERE
DEFINITIONS OF JUSTICE DIVERGE.
AND, AS MORE TECH ENTREPRENEURS
TRADE SILICON VALLEY FOR LOS
ANGELES, THE COUNTER-CULTURE OF
VENICE BEACH STARTS TO
DISAPPEAR.
>> THINGS REALLY STARTEDO GO T
SOUR WHEN GOOGLE MOVED IN, SO
IT'S NOW LICOSIN BEACH.
THE LANDLORDS JUST TURNED AROUND
AND RAISED THE RENT TO THE POINT
WHERE NOW THE ARTIST JUST CAN'T
AFFORD TO LIVE THERE.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: RACIAL TENSIONS AND
POLICE USE OF FORCE DOMINATED
THE NATION'S AGENDA TODAY AFTER
THE LATEST HIGH PROFILE CAASE
INVOLVING A WHITE OFFICER AND A
BLACK VICTIM.
THIS TIME, IT HAPPENED IN NEW
YORK.
BUT NEW CALLS FOR CALM, AND NEW
CRIES OF ANGER, ECHOED ACROSS
CITY AFTER CITY.
AROUND THE COUNTRY, PROTESTS
BUILT AS THE DAY WORE ON.
IN PITTSBURGH, PEOPLE LAID DOWN
IN THE STREET, BLOCKING TRAFFIC.
AND IN NEW YORK CITY, WITH MORE
RALLIES STARTING THIS EVENING,
MAYOR BILL DEBLASIO AGAIN URGED
CALM...
>> WE WILL NOT TOLERATE VIOLENCE
OR DISORDER.
BUT WE THINK BY SHOWING RESPECT
FOR THE DEMOCRATIC PROCESS IS
ONE OF THE RIGHT WAYS OF SETTING
A TONE THAT KEEPS THE PROTESTS
PEACEFUL.
>> Ifill: 83 PROTESTERS WERE
ARRESTED LAST NIGHT IN NEW YORK,
BUT AS IN MANY CITIES AND ON
MANY COLLEGE CAMPUSES, THE
DEMONSTRATIONS WERE LARGELY
PEACEFUL.
THEY BEGAN AFTER A GRAND JURY
DECIDED AGAINST INDICTING POLICE
OFFICER DANIEL PANTALEO IN THE
KILLING OF ERIC GARNER LAST
JULY.
VIRAL VIDEO SHOWED POLICE
STOPPING GARNER ON STATEN ISLAND
FOR SUSPICION OF SELLING UNTAXED
CIGARETTES.
>> I DID NOTHING!
WE'RE SITTING HERE THE WHOLE
TIME, MINDING OUR BUSINESS!
>> Ifill: WHEN GARNER BALKED AT
BEING ARRESTED, PANTALEO WRAPPED
HIS ARM AROUND GARNER'S NECK,
WRESTLING AND HOLDING HIM DOWN.
GARNER, WHO HAD ASTHMA, PLEADED
THAT HE WAS SUFFOCATING...
>> I CAN'T BREATHE!
I CAN'T BREATHE!"
>> Ifill: GARNER DIED LATER AT A
HOSPITAL.
A MEDICAL EXAMINER RULED IT A
HOMICIDE BY A BANNED CHOKEHOLD.
BUT TODAY, THE HEAD OF THE
CITY'S POLICE UNION CALLED
PANTALEO'S ACTION A "TEXTBOOK"
MANEUVER.
>> THIS WAS A PICE OLOFFICER WHO
WAS SENT TO THAT LOCATION TO DO
A DIFFICULT JOB.
HAD TO BRING A PERSON TO THE
GROUND THAT SAID 'I'M NOT GOING'
AND WAS RESISTING ARREST.
WHILE BRINGING THAT PERSON TO
THE GROUND, YES, THEY SAID, 'WE
CAN'T BREATHE.'
BUT THE POLICE OFFICERS AND THE
EMS DID WHAT THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO
DO AT THAT TIME.
IF YOU'RE SPEAKING, YOU CAN
BREATHE.
>> Ifill: MAYOR DIBLASIO
DISAGREED.
HE SAID TODAY HE'S ORDERING A
RETRAINING PROGRAM FOR THE
CITY'S POLICE.
AND CIVIL RIGHTS
INCLUDINGEVER REND AL SHARPTON,
FOCUSED ON THE LEGAL SYSTEM'S
HANDLING OF THE CASES IN NEW
YORK, AND FERGUSON, MISSOURI.
>> WE NEED TO CENTRALIZE AND
MAKE CLEAR THAT WE WANT THE
JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AND FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT TO DEAL WITH THE FACT
THAT GRAND JURY SYSTEMS ON STATE
LEVEL ARE BROKEN AND SEEM TO
LACK CAPACITY TO DEAL WITH
POLICE.
>> Ifill: ATTORNEY GENERAL ERIC
HOLDER HAS ALREADY ORDERED A
CIVIL RIGHTS INVESTIGATION IN
THE GARNER CASE.
AND TODAY, IN CLEVELAND, HE
ANNOUNCED FINDINGS THAT THAT
CITY'S POLICE USE EXCESSIVE
FORCE FAR TOO OFTEN.
>> I THINK WE CERTAINLY SEE
PATTERNS THAT HAVE EMERGED
THROUGH THE INVESTIGATIONS THAT
WE HAVE DONE, WHERE YOU SEE
INADEQUATE TRAINING, WHERE YOU
SEE RESOURCE DEFICIENCIES, WHERE
YOU SEE CULTURAL PROBLEMS THAT
EXIST WITHIN POLICE
DEPTARTMENTS, AND SO I THINK THE
>> Ifill: THE REVIEW BEGAN EVEN
BEFORE AN OFFICER SHOT AND
KILLED A 12-YEAR-OLD BOY WHO
TURNED OUT TO BE CARRYING A TOY
GUN.
A NEW AGREEMENT CALLS FOR A
COURT-APPOINTED MONITOR TO
OVERSEE REFORMS IN THE CLEVELAND
POLICE FORCE.
CIVIL RIGHTS FIGURES ARE LAYING
PLANS FOR
A MARCH AND SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON
LATER THIS MONTH.
WE WILL DELVE DEEPER INTO THE
TENSIONS INVOLVING RACE AND
JUSTICE AFTER THIS NEWS SUMMARY.
A WHITE POLICE CHIEF WAS
INDICTED IN UTAHVILLE IN 2011
WHEN TWO MEN ARGUED OVER A
TRAFFIC TICKET.
EX CHIEF RICHARD COMBS SAID HE
SHOT AND KILLED BERNARD BAILEY
IN SELF-DEFENSE.
COMBS HAD BEEN CHARGED WITH
MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE.
>> Ifill: HOUSE REPUBLICANS
PUSHED THROUGH A BILL TODAY
AIMED AT PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
EXECUTIVE ACTIONS ON
IMMIGRATION.
LAST MONTH, THE PRESIDENT
SHIELDED UP TO FIVE MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS FROM
DEPORTATION.
BUT BY 219 TO 197, THE HOUSE
DECLARED THAT STEP  "NULL AND
VOID."
HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
INSISTED THAT THE SENATE FOLLOW
SUIT.
>> FOR THE OUTGOING SENATE
DEMOCRAT MAJORITY, TO DO
ANYTHING LESS WOULD BE AN ACT OF
MONUMENTAL ARROGANCE.
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ELECTED US
TO HEED THEIR WILL AND NOT TO
BOW TO THE WHIMS OF A WHITE
HOUSE THAT REGARDS THE
LEGISLATIVE PROCESS ESTABLISHED
BY THE CONSTITUTION AS LITTLE
MORE THAN A NUISANCE.
>> Ifill: DESPITE THAT DEMAND,
THERE'S LITTLE PROSPECT OF THE
BILL ADVANCING IN THE SENATE.
>> THE IMMIGRATION ISSUES
RECOGNIZED ARE ONES THAT
GENERATE A LOT OF PASSION, THAT
IT DOES NOT MAKE SENSE FOR US TO
WANT TO PUSH TALENT OUT RATHER
THAN MAKE SURE THEY'RE STAYING
HERE AND --
(APPLAUSE)
-- CONSIDERING THIS.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT MADE
NO MENTION OF A WHITE HOUSE
DETAIL BUT THREATENED ONE IF THE
BILL EVER REACHED HIS DESK.
THE HOUSE ALSO PASSED A DEFENSE
SPENDING BILL TODAY--
AUTHORIZING $585 BILLION
DOLLARS, AND EXPANDING
OPERATIONS IN IRAQ AND SYRIA.
$5 BILLION OF THE MONEY WILL GO
FOR THE FIGHT AGAINST ISLAMIC
STATE MILITANTS.
THE MEASURE ALSO GIVES U.S.
TROOPS A ONE PERCENT PAY RAISE,
AND IT AGAIN BANS MOVING TERROR
SUSPECTS FROM GUANTANAMO TO THE
U.S. MAINLAND.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WILL NAME HIS
CHOICE TO BE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE, TOMORROW.
THE WHITE HOUSE ANNOUNCED THAT
TODAY, WITHOUT CONFIRMING THAT
FORMER PENTAGON OFFICIAL ASHTON
CARTER IS SET AS THE NOMINEE.
IF CONFIRMED, HE'D SUCCEED CHUCK
HAGEL, WHO'S LEAVING AFTER TWO
YEARS.
HAGEL WOULD NOT SAY TODAY IF HE
FELT PRESSURED TO RESIGN.
INSTEAD, HE CALLED IT A "MUTUAL
DECISION".
IN YEMEN TODAY, AN OFFSHOOT OF
AL QAEDA THREATENED TO KILL
AMERICAN HOSTAGE LUKE SOMERS.
THE 33-YEAR-OLD PHOTOJOURNALIST
WAS ABDUCTED MORE THAN A YEAR
AGO, AND HAD NOT BEEN SEEN
UNTIL TODAY'S VIDEO MESSAGE.
THE WHITE HOUSE CONFIRMED THAT
U.S. SPECIAL FORCES HAD HOPED TO
FIND SOMERS DURING A RAID IN
YEMEN LAST MONTH.
>> AS SOON AS THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT HAD RELIABLE
INTELLIGENCE AND AN OPERATIONAL
PLAN, THE PRESIDENT AUTHORIZED
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO
CONDUCT AN OPERATION TO RESCUE
MR. SOMERS.
REGRETTABLY WHEN THE OPERATION
WAS EXECUTED, LUKE WAS NOT
PRESENT, THOUGH HOSTAGES OF
OTHER NATIONALITIES WERE PRESENT
AND THEY WERE RESCUED
>> Ifill: THE AL-QAEDA GROUP
TODAY GAVE THE U.S. THREE DAYS
TO MEET UNSPECIFIED DEMANDS, AND
SAVE SOMERS.
N BGUATTLES ROCKED THE CAPITAL
OF RUSSIA'S SOUTHERN PROVINCE,
CHECHNYA, TODAY.
UNKNOWN ATTACKERS STORMED A
BUILDING IN GROZ, KINYLLING 10
POLICEMEN.
TEN OF THE ATTACKERS ALSO DIED
IN THE ENSUING CLASHES, WHILE
THE BUILDING BURNED.
ISLAMIST SEPARATISTS IN CHHNYAEC
HAVE BEEN FIGHTING TO BREAK AWAY
FOR MORE THAN A DECADE.
BACK IN THIS COUNTRY, THOUSANDS
OF LOW-INCOME WORKERS IN THE
FAST FOOD, HOME CARE AND AIRLINE
INDUSTRIES STAGED PROTESTS,
DEMANDING A $15-DOLLAR-AN-HOUR
MINIMUM WAGE.
ORGANIZERS SAID RALLIES AND
STRIKES WERE BEING HELD IN AT
LEAST 190 CITIES, MAKING THEM
THE MOST EXPANSIVE YET.
THE DEMONSTRATIONS WERE BACKED
BY MAJOR LABOR UNIONS.
AVERAGE PREMIUMS ON
healhtcare.gov WILL INCREASE
FIVE PERCENT ON AVERAGE NEXT
YEAR.
THAT ACCORDING TO A REPORT
RELEASED TODAY BY THE HEALTH AND
HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT TODAY.
BUT OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
OFFICIALS SAY MORE INSURERS WILL
PARTICIPATE IN THE ONLINE
MARKETPLACE.
AND THEY MAINTAINED CUSTOMERS
SHOULD BE ABLE TO SAVE MONEY IF
THEY ARE WILLING TO SHOP AROUND.
ON WALL STREET, THE DOW JONES
AVERAGE LOST 12 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 17,900; THE NASDAQ FELL FIVE
POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,769; AND
THE S&P 500 SLIPPED TO TWO TO
FINISH BELOW 2,072.
NASA'S FIRST TEST FLIGHT OF THE
NEW ORION SPACECRAFT WAS PUT ON
HOLD THIS MORNING.
GUSTY WINDS AND A VALVE PROBLEM
IN THE ROCKET THAT CARRIES ORION
SCRUBBED THE LAUNCH ATTEMPT
UNTIL TOMORROW.
PLANS CALL FOR THE SPACECRAFT TO
EVENTUALLY FERRY PEOPLE TO MARS.
THE UNMANNED TEST FLIGHT IS
SLATED TO LAST FOUR-AND-A-HALF-
HOURS IN EARTH ORBIT.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR,
RACE AND JUSTICE IN STATEN
ISLAND, AND ACROSS THE NATION.
THE RISE OF REPORTS OF SEXUAL
ASSAULTS IN THE MILITARY.
HOW THE KREMLIN USES REALITY TV
IN RUSSIA TO PROMOTE POLITICS.
SILICON VALLEY MOVES SOUTH, AS
MORE TECH START-UPS SET UP IN
LOS ANGELES.
PLUS, POET CLAUDIA RANKINE'S
URGENT VERSE ON RACE AND
POLITICS.
>> Ifill: THE UPROAR OVER
ANOTHER GRAND JURY'S DECISION
NOT TO INDICT IS MAKING ITSELF
FELT COAST TO COAST.
WE START IN STATEN ISLAND, WHERE
ERIC GARNER LIVED AND DIED, AND
WHERE MEMBERS OF THE GRAND JURY
RESIDE.
THE BOROUGH IS ALSO HOME TO MANY
OF THE CITY'S POLICE OFFICERS
AND FIRE FIGHTERS.
NEWSHOUR CORRESPONDENT
WILLIAM BRANGHAM TAKES US THERE.
WHILE PROTESTS OF OUTRAGE EMERGE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, AND IN
DIFFERENT PARTS OF NEW YORK
CITY,  STATEN ISLAND, WHERE ERIC
GARNER DIED, IS RELATIVELY
QUIET.
THAT'S BECAUSE THIS BOROUGH OF
NEARLY HALF A MILLION RESIDENTS
IS NOT LIKE THE REST OF NEW
YORK.
JAMES COHEN TEACHES CRIMINAL LAW
AT FORDHAM UNIVERSITY IN NEW
YORK.
>> STATEN ISLAND IS PART OF NEW
YORK CITY, BUT IN MANY RESPECTS
IT IS UNLIKE THE OTHER BOROUGHS.
IT IS THE MOST CONSERVATIVE OF
THE FIVE BOROUGHS.
IT IS THE MOST DEMOGRAPHICALLY
THE SAME.
>> Reporter: STATEN ISLAND IS
ALSO HOME TO A LARGE PERCENTAGE
OF NEW YORK'S ACTIVE AND RETIRED
FIREFIGHTERS AND POLICE
OFFICERS.
AND HAVING THOSE PUBLIC SERVANTS
AS FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS MIGHT
INFLUENCE HOW PEOPLE HERE FEEL
ABOUT POLICE AND THE GARNER
CASE, EVEN COMPARED TO THE REST
OF THE CITY.
ACCORDING TO A RECENT QUINNIPIAC
POLL, WHILE ONLY HALF OF NEW
YORKERS APPROVE OF OVERALL
POLICE PERFORMANCE IN NEW YORK,
NEARLY 80% OF STATEN ISLANDERS
DO.
IN THE GARNER CASE, 65% OF NEW
YORKERS FELT THERE WAS QUOTE NO
EXCUSE FOR THE POLICE ACTIONS
SEEN IN THAT VIDEO, BUT ONLY 45%
OF STATEN ISLANDERS FELT THAT
WAY.
WHEN ASKED WHETHER CRIMINAL
CHARGES SHOULD'VE BEEN BROUGHT
AGAINST THE POLICE FOR GARNER'S
DEATH, 65% OF NEW YORKERS
SUPPORTED THE IDEA, BUT ONLY 42%
OF STATEN ISLANDERS DID.
>> I WOULD THINK JUSTICE WOULD
PREVAIL.
WE ACTUALLY HAVE IT ON TAPE
DOING THE MANEUVER, AND IT SEEMS
LIKE JUSTICE ISN'T GIVING THEM
THAT.
>> I DON'T UNDERSTAND HOW IT'S,
LIKE, POSSIBLE FOR THAT TO EVEN
HAPPEN.
LIKE, REMOVE THE BADGE, YOU'RE A
HUMAN BEING.
YOU SHOULD BE CHARGED JUST AS
MUCH AS ANYONE ELSE.
>> THE STATEN ISLAND DISTRICT
ATTORNEY DANIEL DONOVAN, JR. UP
FOR REELECTION NEXT YEAR STATED
HE CONDUCTED A THOROUGH
INVESTIGATION INTO GARNER'S
DEATH AND PRESENTED THE
INFORMATION TO THE GRAND JURY.
HE SAID YESTERDAY "I ASSURED THE
PUBLIC I WAS COMMITTED TO A
FAIR, THOROUGH AND RESPONSIBLE
INVESTIGATION INTO MR. GARNER'S
DEATH AND WOULD GO WHEREVER THE
EVIDENCE TOOK ME WITHOUT FEAR OR
FAVOR."
ACCORDING TO JAMES COHEN,
D.A.s ACROSS THE U.S. ARE TOO
CLOSE WITH LOCAL POLICE FORCES
AND PROSECUTORS HAVE A CONFLICT
OF INTEREST TRYING TO FAIRLY
JUDGE POLICE BEHAVIOR.
>> THERE IS SOMETHING INCES
INCESTUOUSS IN A WAY ABOUT THAT
AND THAT IS A PRINCIPAL
EXPLANATION FOR WHY THESE CASES
ENDED UP WITH NO TRUE BILL, NO
INDICTMENT.
>> JURORS USUALLY GET IT RIGHT,
AND YOU HAVE TO BE IN THE SYSTEM
A LOT TO SEE IT, BUT IT DOES
WORK.
IT DOES WORK.
>> STATEN ISLAND DEFENSE
ATTORNEY PATRICK PARODA SAYS HE
BELIEVES THE SYSTEM WORKS FAIRLY
AND HAS SEEN INSTANCES WHERE
POLICE OFFICERS GET PUNISHED FOR
WRONGDOING BUT, ACCORDING TO
HIM, THE GARNER CASE JUST WASN'T
ONE OF THEM.
>> THESE CASES THAT EVOKE A LOT
OF EMOTIONAL RESPONSE ARE VERY
DIFFICULT, AND THE RESULT OF
THEM IS CERTAINLY UNPREDICTABLE
SOMETIMES, AND SOMETIMES ARE
PALTAABLE, THE RESULT, BUT I
HAVEN'T LOST FAITH IN THE
SYSTEM.
>> Ifill: FOR THE VIEWER FROM
NEW YORK CITY HALL, WE'RE JOINED
BY ZACHARY CARTER, ADVISOR TO
MAYOR BILL DE BLASIO.
WASN'T CITY HALL BRACING FOR
THIS OUTCOME, MR. CARTER?
>> BECAUSE IT WAS ANTICIPATED
THAT THE GRAND JURY WOULD BE
TAKING ACTION IN THIS CASE,
OBVIOUSLY WE WERE PREPARED THAT,
DEPENDING ON WHAT THE OUTCOME OF
THE GRAND JURY'S INVESTIGATION
AND PROCESS, THAT THERE MIGHT BE
A RESPONSE AND, SO, WE CERTAINLY
PREPARED OURSELVES FOR A
RESPONSE.
>> Brown: PART OF THE RESPONSE
THE MAYOR ANNOUNCED TODAY WAS
RETRAINING THE ENTIRE POLICE
FORCE.
HOW DOES ONE GO ABOUT DOING
THAT?
IT'S A PRETTY BIG POLICE FORCE.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I THINK THERE
WAS ACCEPTANCE IMMEDIATELY AFTER
THE GARNER INCIDENT THAT
RETRAINING WAS NECESSARY.
THE POLICE COMMISSIONER BILL
BRATTON STATED IMMEDIATELY AFTER
THE INCIDENT THAT HE BELIEVED
THAT, BASED ON HIS REVIEW OF THE
VIDEO, THAT ANY LEGAL CHOKE HOLD
PROHIBITED BY THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT'S POLICY APPARENTLY
HAD BEEN USED.
THERE WAS A DETERMINATION TO
EMBARK ON MAKING SURE THAT THE
POLICY PROHIBITION WAS
REINFORCED THROUGH DIRECTIVES
AND TRAINING, AND THAT HAS BEEN
DONE.
BUT THE COMMISSIONER WAS GOING
FURTHER AND IS EMBARKING ON A
VERY AM A BICIOUS RETRAINING --
AMBITIOUS RETRAINING PROGRAM
THAT REACHES EVERY SINGLE
OFFICER IN THE DEPARTMENT TO
FOCUS ON THE USE OF FORCE, THE
AVOIDANCE OF UNNECESSARY USE OF
FORCE, AND CONSTRUCTIVE WAYS OF
ENGAGING WITH THE COMMUNITY.
>> Brown: AS YOU KNOW --
PARDON ME.
BUT AS YOU KNOW, COMMISSIONER
BRATTON HAS COME UNDER FIRE
HIMSELF FOR WHAT IS CALLED THE
BROKEN WINDOWS POLICING POLICY
WHERE HE BRINGS POLICE ACTION TO
BEAR ON THE MOST MINOR OFFENSES.
REPRESENTATIVEEE VET CLARK IN
WASHINGTON YESTERDAY CALLED IT
JUST A COUSIN TO STOP AND FRISK.
>> ACTUALLY, I DON'T THINK THAT
IS TRUE.
FIRST OF ALL, WITH RESPECT TO
STOP AND FRISK ITSELF, THE MAYOR
AND POLICE COMMISSIONER BRATTON
MADE IT VERY, VERY CLEAR AND BY
THEIR ACTION ENDED THE ABUSE AND
OVERUSE OF STOP AND FRISK AS AN
ENFORCEMENT TACTIC, AND THE
STATISTICS BEAR THAT OUT.
BUT WITH RESPECT TO THE BROKEN
WINDOWS THEORY, THE ISSUE ISN'T
WHETHER OR NOT THE BROKEN
WINDOWS THEORY MAKES SENSE IN
POLICING IN URBAN SETTINGS
BECAUSE ALL THE BROKEN WINDOWS
THEORY SIMPLY SAYS IS THERE
SHOULD BE ATTENTION TO
LOWER-LEVEL OFFENSES SO THERE IS
A SENSE OF ORDER, EVEN IN OUR
MOST EMPOOVE RICHARD COMMUNITIES
THAT ARE OVERREPRESENTED BY
PEOPLE OF COLOR.
BUT HOW YOU ADDRESS THOSE MINOR
OFFENSES IS CRITICAL, AND IN THE
WAKE OF THE ERIC GARNER
INCIDENT, THERE WAS A CLOSE
REEXAMINATION OF WHETHER OR NOT
THE USE OF THE ARREST POWER WAS
A NECESSARY PART OF ADDRESSING
MINOR OFFENSES, AND THE MAYOR
AND THE POLICE COMMISSIONER
CONCLUDED AFTER THIS REVIEW THAT
THERE WERE BROAD CATEGORIES OF
MINOR OFFENSES IN WHICH ARRESTS
WERE NOT NECESSARY AND THAT
ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF SECURING
THE ATTENDANCE OF PERSONS BEFORE
THE COURT, LIKE SUMMONSES, WERE
AVAILABLE AND WERE THE WISER
COURSE OF ACTION IN ORDER TO
AVOID UNNECESSARY
CONFRONTATIONS.
>> Brown: I'M SORRY TO
INTERRUPT.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU
BLUNTLY, DO YOU AGREE THIS
DECISION OF THE GRAND JURY IS A
JUST ONE?
DO YOU AGREE AND DOES THE MAYOR
AGREE?
>> I THINK WITHOUT HAVING AN
OPPORTUNITY TO REVIEW ALL OF THE
EVIDENCE THAT WAS PRESENTED TO
THE GRAND JURY, I DON'T THINK IT
WOULD BE RESPONSIBLE TO JUDGE
WHETHER OR NOT THOSE GRAND
JURORS REACHED A REASONABLE
DECISION.
OBVIOUSLY ON THE BASIS OF WHAT
WAS PUBLIC RECORD AND,
OBVIOUSLY, THAT MOST PROMINENTLY
WAS THE VIDEOTAPE, IT WOULD BE
PUZZLING FOR, I'M SURE, MOST
RESIDENTS OF THE CITY AND EVEN
THOSE LIKE ME WHO GREW UP IN LAW
ENFORCEMENT AS TO HOW THEY COULD
NECESSARILY COME TO THE
CONCLUSION THAT THEY CAME TO.
BUT AGAIN, THERE MAY HAVE BEEN
MUCH PRESENTED BEFORE THE GRAND
JURY OF WHICH WE ARE NOT AWARE.
WHAT I THINK IS IMPORTANT IN OUR
SYSTEM AND IN ANY SYSTEM OF
JUSTICE IS THERE HAS TO BE BOTH
A REALITY AND THE PERCEPTION OF
JUSTICE AND, OBVIOUSLY, THOSE
PERCEPTIONS, TO A LARGE EXTENT,
WERE FORMED BY A VIDEOTAPE THAT
APPEARED TO PROVIDE A FAIRLY
FULL ACCOUNT OF WHAT OCCURRED.
>> Ifill: THANK YOU ZACHARY
CARTER, CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER FOR
THE CITY OF NEW YORK.
>> Ifill: NOW FOR A BROADER LOOK
AT HOW THIS LATEST INTERSECTION
OF RACE AND JUSTICE, WE TURN TO.
CANDACE MCCOY, A PROFESSOR AT
JOHN JAY COLLEGE OF CRIMINAL
JUSTICE IN NEW YORK.
AND JELANI COBB, DIRECTOR OF THE
AFRICANA STUDIES INSTITUTE AT
THE UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT.
WE HAVE A SPLIT SCREEN OF LAW
AND EMOTION.
WAS THE GRAND JURY'S CONCLUSION
A SURPRISE TO YOU, JELANI COBB?
>> NO, IT WAS NOT.
I WAS IN FERGUSON UP UNTIL LAST
WEEK AND BEYOND THAT, YOU KNOW,
IT'S WELL KNOWN IT'S VERY
DIFFICULT TO GET INDICTMENTS
AGAINST POLICE AND WE ALSO KNOW
THE HISTORY OF FAILURE TO INDICT
OR FAILURE TO CONVICT PEOPLE WHO
ARE GUILTY OF OFFENSES AGAINST
AFRICAN-AMERICAN CITIZENS.
SO IT'S DIFFICULT TO HEAR THE
PREVIOUS DESK MR. CARTER KIND OF
RAMBLE THROUGH THAT BUREAUCRATIC
DOUBLE-SPEAK AND SAY THE VIDEO
ATTEMPTS TO SHOW SOMETHING BUT
WE DON'T KNOW WHAT THE GRAND
JURY EXPERIENCED.
WE ALL HAVE EYES AND KNOW THE
PERSON USE THE ADD MANEUVER
BANNED BY THE NYPD AND
CULMINATED IN THE PERSON'S DEATH
AND NO ONE SAID THE GRAND JURY
WAS SUPPOSED TO HAVE CONVICTED
MR. PANTALEO FOR THIS.
SIMPLY WAS THERE ENOUGH EVIDENCE
THAT THERE'S A TRIAL WARRANTED.
AND THE FACT IT DIDN'T WARRANT A
TRIAL IS A MUSE CARRIAGE OF
JUSTICE.
I DON'T KNOW WHY HE COULDN'T
JUST SAY THAT.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK CANDACE
McCOY THE IDEA OF INTENT.
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS IS WHETHER
THE POLICE OFFICER INTENDED TO
MURDER OR TO KILL THE SUSPECT,
WHETHER THAT IS A VALID REASON
FOR THE GRAND JURY TO DECIDE NOT
TO INDICT.
THAT'S RIGHT, GWEN.
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT INTENT,
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT WHAT I INS
THE OFFICER'S MIND.
IF YOU'RE GOING TO CONVICT
SOMEBODY OF MANSLAUGHTER, YOU
HAVE TO SHOW THAT THE PERSON
INTENDED OR AT LEAST RECKLESSLY
ALLOWED A DEATH TO TAKE PLACE.
IN THIS CASE AND, OF COURSE, THE
GRAND JURY STANDARD IS PROBABLE
CAUSE, MORE PROBABLE THAN NOT
THAT THIS IS THE CASE, PROBABLY
NOT.
IN FACT, THE OFFICER HIMSELF
SAID I DID NOT INTEND THIS, I
DID NOT INTEND HIM TO DIE.
WHAT WE HAVE HERE IS A REALLY
TERRIBLE MISTAKE AND PROBABLY
NEGLIGENCE, BUT THAT'S A CIVIL
LAWSUIT AND NOT A CRIMINAL
PROSECUTION.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK JELANI
COBB TO RESPOND TO THAT BUT ALSO
I WANT TO ASK YOU TO RESPOND TO
THIS IDEA THE MAYOR PUT FORWARD
TODAY ABOUT RETRAINING THE
POLICE FORCE AND WHETHER THAT
WILL HAVE SOME SORT OF EFFECT.
>> WELL, I MEAN, HERE'S THE
DIFFICULTY:  PEOPLE HAVE KNOWN
SINCE ANTHONY BAEZ, CERTAINLY IF
NOT BEFORE THEN, THE PLAIN
LOGICAL DEDUCTION THAT IF YOU
CUT OFF SOMEONE'S AIR SUPPLY IT
TENDS TO CULMINATE IN A
FATALITY, OR AT LEAST THIS IS A
POSSIBILITY.
SO INSTEAD OF THIS BEING A
SIMPLE MISTAKE, THERE WERE FOUR
OR FIVE OFFICERS ATOP
MR. GARNER, AND, SO, WHAT
EXACTLY WOULD QUALIFY?
I WAS WONDERING IF WE COULD BE
CLEAR ABOUT THE PARAMETERS, WHAT
EXACTLY IS LAW ENFORCEMENT NOT
ALLOWED TO DO?
>> Ifill: SO DOES THE TRAINING
SPEAK TO THAT.
>> I'M NOT SURE THE TRAINING
DOES.
IF PEOPLE WERE RETRAINED AND
THIS MANEUVER WAS ALREADY BANNED
BUT THEY DON'T FOLLOW THE
TRAINING AND THERE'S NO
CONSEQUENCES FOR FAILURE TO
FOLLOW THE TRAINING WE'VE
ACCOMPLISHED NOTHING.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK CANDACE
McCOY TO WEIGH IN ON THAT.
>> YES.
LET'S REMEMBER THAT THERE WAS A
MEDICAL EXAMINER REPORT HERE,
AND THE MEDICAL EXAMINER OF THE
CITY OF NEW YORK TOOK VERY
CAREFUL NOTE OF WHAT HAD
HAPPENED.
THERE ARE TWO PARTS OF THAT
REPORT AND THEY SEEM TO BE
FORGETTING THE SECOND PART.
THE FIRST WAS THAT THERE HAD
BEEN PRESSURE AND COMPRESSION ON
MR. GARNER'S THROAT.
WHETHER IT WAS A CHOKE HOLD OR
SOME OTHER KIND OF HOLD I THINK
IS BASICALLY IMMATERIAL.
IT WAS A BAD THING.
SECONDLY -- AND THIS IS WHAT
PEOPLE ARE FORGETTING -- IS THAT
THERE WAS COMPRESSION ON HIS
STOMACH.
THIS IS A CLASSIC CASE OF WHAT
IS KNOWN AS POSITIONAL ASPHYXIA.
VIEWERS IN LOS ANGELES WILL
REMEMBER IN THE LATE '90s
THERE WAS A SERIES OF CASES IN
WHICH OVERWEIGHT PEOPLE, MANY OF
THEM WITH ASTHMA PROBLEMS, WERE
KILLED WHEN THEY WERE ARRESTED
BY POLICE USING THESE BAD
TACTICS.
SO IT'S BAD TACTICS, BUT THIS IS
NOT A CRIME.
>> Ifill: THERE'S A LOT OF
CONVERSATION WITH THE CLEVELAND
POLICE DEPARTMENT, THE EFFECT
THAT USED EXCESSIVE FORCE, BODY
CAMERAS PART OF THE
CONVERSATION, FEDERAL CIVIL
RIGHTS INVESTIGATIONS.
DOES THIS KIND OF SCRUTINY, THE
PROTESTS WE SEE TONIGHT, JELANI
COBB, DO YOU THINK THAT CHANGE
WHAT HAPPENS OR ULTIMATELY
HAPPENS NEXT AND SHOULD IT?
>> I MEAN, IT SHOULD.
IT'S POSSIBLE THE ONLY HOPE THAT
WE HAVE.
WHEN PEOPLE HAVE NO RECOURSE,
THEY TAKE TO THE STREETS IN
PROTEST WHEN THE SYSTEM DOESN'T
ACTUALLY PROVIDE THEM WITH
JUSTICE.
THAT'S THE ONLY HOPE PEOPLE HAVE
THAT, BY ORGANIZING, THEY CAN
CREATE ENOUGH PRESSURE TO FORCE
INSTITUTIONS TO NOT BEHAVE IN
THE WAY THEY TYPICALLY WOULD.
>> OKAY.
ONE BRIEF RESPONSE FROM CANDACE
McCOY.
>> I AGREE COMPLETELY WITH
PROFESSOR COBB.
I THINK WE HAVE TO CHANGE OUR
FOCUS FROM CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
ONE MORE BODY BEHIND BARS IS NOT
GOING TO WORK.
BUT HE IS RIGHT, THERE ARE
SYSTEMATIC CHANGES WE HAVE TO
LOOK AT HERE AND WE CAN DO THAT.
>> Ifill: CANDACE McCOY,
JOHN JAY COLLEGE OF CRIMINAL
JUSTICE IN NEW YORK AND JELANI
COBB, DIRECTOR OF THE AFRICANA
STUDIES INSTITUTE AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF CONECTICUT.
THANK YOU BOTH.
>> Ifill: THE U.S. MILITARY,
UNDER HEAVY FIRE IN RECENT YEARS
OVER ITS HANDLING OF SEXUAL
ASSAULTS, RELEASED ITS LATEST
REPORT TODAY ON HOW ITS MANAGING
THE PROBLEM, DRAWING CRITICISM
FROM SOME.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS THE STORY.
>> AFTERNOON.
>> Sreenivasan: DEFENSE
SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL LAID OUT
THE NEW NUMBERS AT THE PENTAGON,
BASED ON A SURVEY OF THE RANKS
BY THE RAND CORPORATION.
ESTIMATED CASES OF SEXUAL
ASSAULT FELL TO ABOUT 19,000,
DOWN 25% FROM TWO YEARS AGO, BUT
ACTUAL REPORTS OF ASSAULT
INCREASED 8% FROM LAST YEAR.
HAGEL SAID THE FINDINGS SHOW
BOTH PROGRESS AND THE NEED FOR
MUCH MORE WORK.
>> AFTER LAST YEAR'S
UNPRECEDENTED 50% INCREASE IN
REPORTING, THE RATE HAS
CONTINUED TO GO UP.
THAT'S ACTUALLY GOOD NEWS.
TWO YEARS AGO, WE ESTIMATED
ABOUT ONE-IN-TEN SEXUAL ASSAULTS
WERE BEING REPORTED.
TODAY, IT'S ONE-IN-FOUR.
THESE CRIMES, HOWEVER, ARE STILL
HEAVILY UNDERREPORTED, BOTH
NATIONALLY AND IN THE MILITARY,
SO WE MUST MAINTAIN OUR FOCUS
THROUGHOUT THE RANKS AND
CONTINUE TO EARN THE CONFIDENCE
OF SURVIVORS.
>> Sreenivasan: 43% OF THE
ASSAULTS REPORTED BY WOMEN AND
MORE THAN A THIRD BY MEN WERE
"PENETRATIVE SEXUAL ASSAULTS."
THOSE INCLUDE RAPE AND
PENETRATION WITH AN OBJECT.
THE SURVEY ALSO FOUND MORE THAN
60% OF VICTIMS SAID THEY FACED
RETALIATION AFTER THEY REPORTED
ASSAULTS.
BUT MISSOURI SENATOR CLAIRE
McCASKILL, WHO SPONSORED A NEW
LAW ON MILITARY SEXUAL ASSAULTS,
SUGGESTED A DIFFERENT WAY OF
LOOKING AT THAT RESULT.
>> I WOULD BE MUCH MORE
CONCERNED ABOUT FLAT RETALIATION
IF WE WERE GETTING NUMBERS BACK
SAYING "I DON'T HAVE CONFIDENCE
IN THE COMMAND, THE CLIMATE HAS
NOT CHANGED, WE'RE NOT GETTING
THE SUPPORT, AND I WOULDN'T
RECOMMEND OTHER PEOPLE COMING
FORWARD."
BUT WE GOT JUST THE OPPOSITE
NUMBERS.
HIGH LEVELS OF SATISFACTION WITH
COMMAND CLIMATE, HIGH LEVELS OF
SATISFACTION WITH THEIR SPECIAL
VICTIMS COUNSELS AND VICTIM
ADVOCATES.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PENTAGON
REPORT DOES CALL FOR ADDITIONAL
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES TO
PREVENT RETALIATION.
IT ALSO RECOMMENDS INCREASING
UNIT LEADERS' KNOWLEDGE AND
UNDERSTANDING OF THE ISSUE.
BUT NEW YORK SENATOR KIRSTEN
GILLIBRAND BRANDED THE STUDY "A
FAILURE OF LEADERSHIP."
SHE'S PUSHED TO TAKE SEXUAL
ASSAULT INVESTIGATIONS OUTSIDE
THE CHAIN OF COMMAND.
>> WHAT WE HAVE TODAY IS NOT
ZERO TOLERANCE.
WE HAVE ZERO ACCOUNTABILITY.
AND IF THEY CONTINUE TO RETAIN
ALL DECISION MAKING IN THE HANDS
OF THE SMALLEST NUMBER OF
COMMANDERS, THEY'RE JUST...
THEY'RE NOT RECOGNIZING THE
FLAWS IN THEIR OWN SYSTEM.
THEY'RE TRYING TO COVER IT UP,
THEY'RE TRYING TO SHOVE IT UNDER
THE RUG, THEY'RE NOT SEEKING
JUSTICE, AND THEY'RE NOT
PROTECTING THE MEN AND WOMEN WHO
ARE BEING RAPED.
TO HAVE RETALIATION BE
UNCHANGED, UNTOUCHED, IS AN
EGREGIOUS FAILURE.
>> Sreenivasan: GILLIBRAND SAID
SHE AND OTHER SENATORS WILL TRY
TO AMEND THE DEFENSE
AUTHORIZATION BILL THIS MONTH,
TO MAKE SEXUAL ASSAULT
INVESTIGATIONS INDEPENDENT OF
COMMANDERS.
>> Ifill: RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN DELIVERED HIS
ANNUAL STATE OF THE NATION
SPEECH TODAY.
DEFIANT IN THE FACE OF
INTERNATIONAL SANCTIONS, HE
BOASTED OF HIS COUNTRY'S
INCURSIONS INTO UKRAINE AND THE
ANNEXATION OF CRIMEA,
REITERATING THAT IT BELONGS TO
HIS NATION.
>> ( translated ): FOR RUSSIA,
CRIMEA, ANCIENT KORSUN,
CHERSONESES, SEVASTOPOL HAVE A
MAJOR CIVILISATIONAL SACRED
MEANING.
THE SAME AS TEMPLE MOUNT IN
JERUSALEM FOR THOSE WHO CONFSES
ISLAM AND JUDAISMAND . THIS IS
EXACTLY HOW  WE WILL TREAT IT
FROM HERE FOR EVER.
>> Ifill: FOR MANY OBSERVERS,
THE SPEECH WAS CLASSIC PUTIN,
USING TELEVISION TO ASSERT HIS
VIEW OF REALITY TO HIS OWN
PEOPLE AND THE WORLD.
PUTIN'S USE OF THE MEDIUM IS THE
SUBJECT OF A NEW BOOK, "NOTHING
IS TRUE AND EVERYTHING IS
POSSIBLE," BY PETER POMERANTSEV,
A RUSSIAN-BORN BRITISH WRITER
AND TELEVISION PRODUCER.
HE RETURNED TO MOSCOW TO WORK IN
THE KREMLIN'S VAST TELEVISION
APPARATUS, CREATING RUSSIAN
REALITY TV SHOWS.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS
CORRESPONDENT MARGARET WARNER
SPOKE TO HIM STERYEDAY.
R> Reporter: THANK YOU FO
JOINING US.
YOU'VE DESCRIBED TELEVISION AS
THE NUCLEAR WEAPON OF POLITICS
IN RUSSIA.
>> YES, IT IS THE CORE OF THE
POLITICAL SYSTEM.
YOU HAVE TO IMAGINE A COUNTRY
THAT IS ABSOLUTELY HUGE.
IT'S ABOUT A SIXTH OF THE
WORLD'S LAND MASS AND SEWS
LOGICALLY VARIED.
SO YOU HAVE CONTEMPORARY TOWNS
LIKE MOSCOW AND MERE FUEDAL
VILLAGES AND THE ONLY THING TO
BRING THEM TOGETHER IS THE
TELEVISION.
>> Reporter: AT THE CENTER OF
ALL OF THIS IS THE PRESIDENT
HIMSELF AS PERFORMANCE ARTIST.
WHAT DO YOU MEAN?
>> PUTIN WAS NO ONE.
HEAS W THIS GUY WEARING HORRIBLE
SUITS EVERYWHERE HE WENT.
HE WAS A NO ONE AND THEY TOOK
HIM AND CREATED HIM.
AND P.R. TV PRODUCER GUYS WHO
WERE CLOSE TO THE K.G.B., THIS
INCREDIBLE MIX OF SECRET
SERVICES AND TELEVISION
PRODUCES, AND THEY MADE HIM INTO
A HERO FOR ALL SEASONS, SO THAT
HE COULD BE THE IDEAL LOVER,
MATCHER GUY AND THE FIRST THING
VLADIMIR PUTIN DID IN 2000 WAS
TO TAKE OVER TELEVISION AND GET
RID OF THE OLIGARCHS.
>> Reporter: AT A VERY YOUNG
AGE YOU GOT A CHANCE TO GET IN
ON THE INSIDE.
YOU DESCRIBE ONE ORGANIZATION
THAT ESSENTIALLY CONTROLS
EVERYTHING ON TELEVISION,
ENTERTAINMENT AND NEWS.
>> THAT'S THE KREMLIN.
THERE WAS A TELEVISION TO ALL
THE MAJOR TV CHANNELS BUT IT WAS
COORDINATED BY THE KREMLIN
ITSELF.
>> Reporter: YOU STARTED OUT
AS A PRODUCER FOR ONE OF THE
NETWORKS IN THAT BIG APPARATUS
CALLED T.N.T. DOING REALITY
SHOWS.
>> AROUND 2000, TV STRTEDA
MAKING MONEY AND THEY WANTED TO
GET PRODUCERS FROMHE T WEST TO
COME MAKE THE RUSSIAN APPRENTICE
OR HOUSEWIVES OF NEW YORK.
THAT'S WHY THEY NEEDED PEOPLE
LIKE ME.
THE KREMLIN IS VERY, VERY AWARE
THEY HAVE TO MAKE TV
ENTERTAINING NOWADAYS.
THEY WILL SYNTHESIZE POLITICAL
MANIPULATION AND ENTERTAINMENT.
VERY SOON I FOUND ENTERTAINMENT
HAD AN INSIDIOUS ELEMENT OF
SOCIAL CONTROL.
POLICY HAS BECOME REALITY SHOWS.
YOU HAVE DEBATES ON RUSSIAN TV
SCRIPTED FROM THE KREMLIN.
OFF PUP PET RIGHT WING AND LEFT
WING OPPOSITION AND THEY SHOUT
AT EACH OTHER AND THEY THINK,
OH, MY GOD, PUTIN IS IN THE
MIDDLE AND THE OPPOSITION IS
MAD.
THE POPULATION BECOMES ALMOST
INCAPABLE OF CRITICAL ANALYSIS.
SO THAT'S A DEEPER FORM OF
MANIPULATION.
>> Reporter: THIS HAS MUCH
BROADER INTERNATIONAL
IMPLICATIONS.
THIS ISN'T JUST A PROBLEM FOR
RUSSIA.
>> INCREASINGLY, THE CREMELY
THINKS ABOUT INFORMATION AS A
WEAPON, A TOOL TO DISTRACT,
DEMORALIZE THE ENEMY, TO BE USED
AS A DECOY IN A MILITARY
OPERATION.
SO NOW YOU HAVE A HUGE
INTERNATIONAL SORT OF
BROADCASTING ARM SET UP BY THE
KREMLIN WHOSE AIM IS TO DO
PSYCHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS AGAINST
RUSSIA'S ENEMIES, UKRAINE AND
INCREASINGLY THE WEST.
>> Reporter: WE'VE SEEN IT
PLAY OUT IN UKRAINE.
>> IN UKRAINE IT'S BEEN TOTAL.
THERE'S A SMOOTH MILITARY
OPERATION AND 98% PROPAGANDA.
THEY USE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION
TO DO DISINFORMATION.
RUSSIA TODAY SPITS OUT TENS OF
CONSPIRACY THEORIES OF WHY THE
AIRPLANE CRASH HAPPENED.
THEY DON'T DO IT OUT OF A SEARCH
FOR THE TRUTH OR A PASSION OR
JOURNALISM, THEY'RE DOING IT TO
MUDDY THE WATER AS QUICKLY AS
POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE GREAT
MYSTERIES IN THE WEST IS WHY, AS
THE SANCTIONS TIGHTEN AROUND
RUSSIA, AS OIL PRICES DROP, AS
RUSSIA'S HEADED INTO RECESSION
NEXT YEAR, PUTIN REMAINS WIDELY
POPULAR.
>> IN RUSSIA, WHEN 80% SAY THEY
LOVE VLADIMIR PUTIN, THEY'RE
SEEING THEY FEAR HIM.
>> Reporter: IS THERE
SOMETHING ABOUT HIM THAT TOUCHES
SOMETHING IN THE RUSSIANS' SOUL?
>> I THINK THEY'VE MANIPULATED
IT TO MAKE PEOPLE THROUGH IT'S
SOMETHING IN THEM THAT TOUCHES
SOULS.
THEY STARTED A WAR TO GET HIS
RATINGS UP.
LIKE BUSH AND IRAQ.
THE QUESTION ISOW H WILL THEY
HOLD THIS?
RUSSIA ISN'T IN A WAR WITH
UKRAINE ACCORDING TO RUSSIAN
PROPAGAND ITA, IS WITH AMERICA.
AMERICA IS BARELY PAYING
ATTENTION TO RUSSIA.
RUSSIA, IF YOU WATCH TV IS NOW
AT WAR WITH AMERICA.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: NEXT, REPLACING SURF
SHOPS WITH START-UPS AS TECH
TITANS MOVE TO CATCH SOME RAYS
AND SOME WAVES.
STEVE GOLDBLOOM REPORTS.
>> IN SAN FRANCISCO, COMPUTER
PROGRAMMERS ARE LIKE ROCK STARS.
HERE IN LOS ANGELES, THE
ROCTARSKS ARE THE ROCKSTARS.
BUT NOW, THAT'S STARTING TO
CHANGE AS MORE ENTREPRENEURS ARE
TRADING IN THE HIGH COSTS OF BAY
AREA LIVING FOR SUNNY SPACE
RIGHT HERE IN VENICE BEACH.
THEY EVEN HAVE A NAME FOR IT:
SILICON BEACH.
BUT AS IS THE CASE IN SAN
FRANCISCO, THE TECH BOOM BRINGS
WITH IT BOTH PROSPERITY AND ITS
SHARE OF PROBLEMS.
>> WE'RE A MARKETPLACE FOR AUTO,
SPORT, AND HOBBY ENTHUSIASTS.
>> IT'S AWESOME TO BE BY THE
WATER AND WORKING AT THE SAME
TIME.
>> 365 DAYS A YEAR, I CAN WALK
TO WORK.
IT'S GONNA BE GREAT, IT'S GONNA
BE SUNNY, IT'S GONNA BE 70!
>> "L.A. TIMES" TECH REPORTER
PARESH DAVE COVERS SILICON
BEACH.
>> THE WEST SIDE OF LOS ANGELES
HAS ALWAYS BEEN SORT OF A YOUNG,
HIP DISTRICT WITH THINGS LIKE
THE WEATHER AND BEING CLOSE TO
THE BEACH, TO SOME THAT WAS
ATTRACTIVE AND I THINK THAT'S
WHAT GOT IT STARTED.
>> ENTREPRENEUR ERIK RANNANLA
DECIDED TO RELOCATE TO L.A. FROM
THE BAY AREA.
HE CO-FOUNDED MUCKER CAPITAL,
THE FIRST STARTUP ACCELERATOR TO
ARRIVE IN SILICON BEACH.
THEY NURTURE AND INVEST IN YOUNG
STARTUP COMPANIES.
>> I'VE SEEN A LOT OF THESE
BUILDINGS SWITCHOVER FROM YOU
KNOW, NOT TECH COMPANIES TO TECH
COMPANIES.
HERE'S C.E.O. FARBOD SHORAKA:
>> THIS IS ONLY 1,500 SQUARE
FEET BUT WE HAVE ALMOST 17
PEOPLE IN THIS OFFICE.
>> SO YOU'RE GROWING.
>> YEAH, HOPEFULLY WE'RE GOING
TO A NEW OFFICE SPACE.
IT'S GOING TO BE EXCITING FOR
US.
BUT GOOD PROBLEMS TO HAVE, WE'RE
OUTGROWING OUR CURRENT OFFICE
SPACE.
>> Reporter: DON'T YOU NEED TO
BE WHERE THE MONEY IS AND ISN'T
THE MONEY IN SILICON VALLEY?
>> THE MONEY IS COMING DOWN HERE
NOW SO IT'S EXCITING. WE HAVE
EVEN INVESTORS COMING TODAY TO
VISIT US THAT ARE FROM PALO ALTO
AND CHICAGO.
>> ONE OF THE PIONEERS HERE OF
SILICON BEACH IS SNAPCHAT.
IT'S THE ENORMOUSLY POPULAR APP
AMONG TEENAGERS THAT LETS YOU
SHARE PHOTOGRAPHS THAT SELF
DESTRUCT SHORTLY AFTER THEY
ARRIVE.
THEY OCCUPY A FULL CITY BLOCK
RIGHT OFF THE BEACH HERE IN
VENICE. LAST YEAR, THEY TURNED
DOWN A THREE BILLION ACQUISITION
OFFER FROM FACEBOOK TO TRY TO
MAKE IT HERE ON THEIR OWN.
>> I THINK THAT WAS SORT OF A
BIG TURNING POINT AND SINCE
THEN, PEOPLE ARE LIKE, "OH WELL
IF SNAPCHAT CAN BUILD A GLOBAL
BRAND HERE IN LOS ANGELES, WHY
CAN'T WE?
>> THREE YEARS AGO I USED TO
HEAR PEOPLE PITCHING SCRIPTS IN
COFFEE SHOPS, NOW THEY'RE
PITCHING BUSINESS PLANS AND
BUSINESS IDEAS FOR STARTUPS.
>> THIS IS THE OFFICES OF EPOXY.
WHICH DOESN'T REALLY LOOK LIKE
AN OFFICE, BUT I'M GOING TO...
HELLO THERE!
>> HELLO.
WELCOME TO EPOXY!
>> EPOXY TV IS A SOCIAL PLATFORM
FOR ONLINE VIDEO CREATORS.
THEY MAKE YOUTUBE STARS GO VIRAL
BY LEVERAGING EVERY SOCIAL MEDIA
PLATFORM UNDER THE SUN.
ITS RUN BY JUAN BRUCE AND JASON
AHMAD.
>> STHISO  IS YOUR HOME OR YOUR
OFFICE?
>> THIS IS OUR OFFICE.
IT'S GOT A LITTLE BIT OF AN
INTERESTING HISTORY IN THAT IT'S
ACTUALLY PART OF DENNIS HOPPER'S
FORMER COMPOUND.
AND THIS PARTICULAR BUILDING IS
A FRANK GEHRY BUILDING FROM THE
1980'S.
NOW THE FUNNY THING IS A LOT OF
STARTUPS HAVE THESE BUILDINGS
W.NO
THERE'S TWO STARTUPS BEHIND US.
>> SO THE STARTUPS ARE TAKING
OVER.
>> YES.
>> AS THE STARTUPS MOVE-IN, SOME
LONGTIME VENICE RESIDENTS ARE
MOVING OUT.
WORLD RENOWNED ARTIST LADDIE
JOHN DILL WAS THE ORIGINAL OWNER
OF THE FRANK GEHRY BUILDING NOW
OCCUPIED BY EPOXY TV.
>> I MOVED TO VENICE IN 1968.
I WAS FORCED TO LEAVE MY STUDIO
OF 28 YEARS BECAUSE THE RENT WAS
RAISED TO $42,000 BUCKS A MONTH.
THINGS REALLY STARTED TO GO SOUR
WHEN GOOGLE MOVED IN, SO IT'S
NOW SILICON BEACH.
THE LANDLORDS JUST TURNED AROUND
AND RAISED THE RENT TO THE POINT
WHERE NOW THE ARTIST JUST CAN'T
AFFORD TO LIVE THERE.
>> THE RISE OF HOUSING COSTS HAS
LEAD TO BIG BUSINESS FOR TAMI
PARDEE OWNER OF PARDEE
PROPERTIES.
SHE'S THE HIGHEST SELLING REAL-
ESTATE BROKER IN SILICON BEACH.
>> BUSINESS HAS DEFINITELY
PICKED UP.
OVER THE LAST TWO YEARS WE'VE
HAD 20% GAINS EACH YEAR AND IT'S
ALMOST COMPLETELY DUE TO THE
TECH SECTOR.
>> WHEN DID THIS GO ON THE
MARKET?
>> IT JUST WENT ON YESTERDAY.
>> AND HOW LONG WILL IT BE ON
THE MARKET.
>> I THINK IT'S ALREADY SOLD TO
BE HONEST WITH YOU.
IT'S REALLY CREATIVE, THE
TECHNOLOGY SECTOR, AND VENICE IS
KNOWN FOR ITS CREATIVITY IN THE
ART WORLD.
SO IT'S ACTUALLY A GREAT MESHING
OF CULTURES.
THERE'S BEEN A LITTLE
GENTRIFICATION ISSUES, YOU KNOW
NOT ISSUES, BUT JUST
GENTRIFICATION GOING ON I WOULD
SAY AND THAT'S DIFFICULT.
>> WE'RE HERE INSIDE A LIVE IN
WORKSPACE IN VENICE.
THE RESIDENT WISHES TO REMAIN
ANONYMOUS BUT HE HAS BEEN
SHOWING US AROUND.
HE'S BEEN LIVING HERE SINCE
1967.
THERE ARE A FEW OTHER ARTISTS
HERE AND THEY ARE GOING TO HAVE
TO LEAVE AT THE END OF FEBRUARY
BECAUSE THEY RECEIVED A NOTICE
FROM THE OWNER.
>> THE FAMILY HAS DECIDED IT IS
TIME TO DEVELOP THE LOT WHICH
UNFORTUNATELY MEANS EVICTION.
I MUST HAVE EVERYONE OUT BY THE
END OF FEBRUARY 28TH.
>> HERE'S JUAN BRUCE AGAIN OF
EPOXY TV.
>> VENICE HAS ALWAYS BEEN AN
EXPERIMENTAL AND ARTISTIC
COMMUNITY AND SO STARTUPS PRETTY
MUCH FIT PERFECTLY IN THAT
ETHOS.
ORIGINALLY, THIS WAS AN ARTISTS
IN RESIDENCE LIVE-WORK LOFT AND
NOW IT'S STILL VERY MUCH A LIVE-
WORK LOFT BUT WE'RE LIVING A
STARTUP LIFE.
>> IT'S CLEAR THE TECH SCENE
GRAVITATES TOWARDS COUNTER-
CULTURES: THE HIPPIES OF SAN
FRANCISCO, THE ROCKERS OF
AUSTIN, AND NOW THE ARTISTS OF
VENICE.
BUT AS TECH BRINGS WITH IT HIGH
PAYING JOBS AND RISING HOME
PRICES, IRONICALLY IT MAKES IT
DIFFICULT FOR THOSE COUNTER-
CULTURES TO PERSIST.
FOR THE NEWSHOUR IN LOS ANGELES,
I'M STEVE GOLDBLOOM.
>> Ifill: AS PROTESTERS RETURN
TO THE STREETS TONIGHT, WE'LL
CONTINUE OUR LOOK AT RACE AND
JUSTICE THROUGH THE EYES OF A
POET.
BUT FIRST, IT'S PLEDGE WEEK ON
PBS.
THIS BREAK ALLOWS YOUR PUBLIC
TELEVISION STATION TO ASK FOR
YOUR SUPPORT.
AND THAT SUPPORT HELPS KEEP FORD
CHARGES AGAINST ONE OF THE
PROTESTERS. A TRIAL FOR THE
OTHER FOUR IS SET FOR DECEMBER
22.
>> Ifill: FINALLY TONIGHT,
PERSONAL REFLECTIONS ON THE
RECENT UPHEAVAL INVOLVING BLACK
MEN AND WHITE POLICE OFFICERS IN
NEW YORK, FERGUSON, CLEVELAND
AND BEYOND.
THEY COME FROM POET AND
PLAYWRIGHT CLAUDIA RANKINE
HER BOOK, "CITIZEN" WAS A
FINALIST FOR THE NATIONAL BOOK
AWARD.
>> I'M CLAUDIRANKA INE.
A POET, A PLAYWRIGHT.
I ALSO TEACH AT POMONA COLLEGE.
I SEE MYSELF AS A CITIZEN,
WALKING AROUND, COLLECTING
STORIES.
AND USING THOSE STORIES TO
REFLECTOUR  LIVES THROUGH
POETRY, THROUGH ESSAYS, CREATING
THESE HYBRID TEXTS AND PLAYS
THAT REFLECT BACK TO US WHO WE
ARE.
IN MY MOST RECENT BOOK
"CITIZEN", I WANTED TO TRY TO
TRACK THE MOMENTS THAT DISRUPT
INTERACTIONS, ESPECIALLY BETWEEN
PEOPLE OF DIFFERENT RACES.
THE BOOK CONTAINS TWO KINDS OF
AGGRESSIONS.
WHAT IS OFTEN CALLED MICRO-
AGGRESSIONS OR SMALL MOMENTS.
BUT THEN I WANTED TO BEGIN TO
UNDERSTAND HOW WE GET TO THESE
MAJOR MOMENTS, THE MURDERS OF
BLACK MEN.
THESE KIND OF MOMENTS IN 2014
WHEN YOU THINK "HOW DID THAT
HAPPEN?
AND I WANTED TO TRACK IT BACK
AND SAY PEOPLE IN THEIR DAILY
LIVES BY BELIEVING AND SAYING
THESE SMALL THINGS, THEY WILL
ADD UP TO MAJOR, MAJOR
AGGRESSIONS AGAINST PEOPLE JUST
BECAUSE OF THE COLOR OF THEIR
SKIN.
SO THE BOOK TRACKS THE SMALL TO
THE LARGE.
IN LINE AT THE DRUGSTORE IT'S
FINALLY YOUR TURN AND THEN IT'S
NOT AS HE WALKS IN FRONT OF YOU
AND PUTS HIS THINGS ON THE
COUNTER.
THE CASHIER SAYS, "SIR, SHE WAS
NEXT."
WHEN HE TURNS TO YOU HE IS TRULY
SURPRISED.
OH MY GOD, I DIDN'T SEE YOU.
YOU MUST BE IN A HURRY, YOU
OFFER.
NO, NO, NO, I REALLY DIDN'T SEE
YOU.
THE OCCASIONS OF POLICE VIOLENCE
IS SOMETHING THIS BOOK TURNS ON.
POLICE VIOLENCE AGAINST BLACK
MEN.
I FEEL LIKE IN 50 YEARS PEOPLE
WILL LOOK BACK AND SAY "HOW
COULD WE LET THIS HAPPEN?
HOW COULD WE LET AN ENTIRE
COUNTRY WAREHOUSE BLACK MEN,
SHOOT THEM AND NO ONE WOULD
OBJECT?
SO I FEEL LIKE IT'S MY PERSONAL
MISSION TO KEEP THOSE STORIES AS
PRESENT AS I AM POSSIBLY ABLE TO
KEEP THEM PRESENT.
TRAYVON MARTIN'S NAME SOUNDS
FROM THE CAR RADIO A DOZEN TIMES
EACH HALF HOUR.
YOU PULL YOUR LOVE BACK INTO THE
SEAT BECAUSE THOUGH NO ONE SEEMS
TO BE CHASING YOU, THE JUSTICE
SYSTEM HAS OTHER PLANS.
FOR A FEW YEARS NOW I'VE BEEN
WORKING WITH MY HUSBAND, THE
FILMMAKER JOHN LUCAS, ON
SITUATION VIDEOS.
ONE OF THE SITUATION VIDEOS
ENTITLED "STOP AND FRISK" WE
SHOT HERE IN CLAREMONT, USING
POMONA STUDENTS, BECAUSE WE
WANTED TO LOOK AT WHAT IT MEANT
FOR YOUNG BLACK MEN TO JUST BE
WALKING AND TRYING TO ENGAGE IN
THEIR DAILY-NESS AND HAVING THE
POLICE AND THE THREAT OF THE
POLICE HOVERING ABOUT THEM.
EVERYWHERE WERE FLASHES, A SIREN
SOUNDING AND A STRETCHED-OUT
ROAR.
GET ON THE GROUND.
GET ON THE GROUND NOW.
THEN I JUST KNEW.
AND YOU ARE NOT THE GUY AND
STILL YOU FIT THE DESCRIPTION
BECAUSE THERE IS ONLY ONE GUY
WHO IS ALWAYS THE GUY FITTING
THE DESCRIPTION.
I WENT TO FERGUSON A WEEK AFTER
MICHAEL BROWN WAS SHOT SIX
TIMES, TWICE IN THE HEAD.
AND WHEN I WENT TO HIS
NEIGHBORHOOD.
PEOPLE WOULD COME UP TO ME AND
SAY THINGS LIKE "WOULD YOU LIKE
TO TAKE A PICTURE OF MY TODDLER
WITH HIS HANDS UP IN THE AIR?"
AND ONE YOUNG MAN SAID TO ME "I
LOOK JUST LIKE HIM.
THAT COULD BE ME."
AND BOTH THINGS DISTURBED ME,
THE SENSE OF BLACK BODIES INSIDE
A DEAD BODY.
SINCE I'VE BEEN TO FERGUSON, THE
ONLY THING I'VE DONE SO FAR IS
WRITTEN A SMALL HAIKU.
IT GOES BECAUSE WHITE MEN CAN'T
POLICE THEIR IMAGINATION BLACK
MEN ARE DYING.
AND I THOUGHT THAT WOULD BE THE
BEGINNING OF SOMETHING AND I
WOULD KEEP GOING.
BUT I HAVEN'T BEEN ABLE TO WRITE
ANYMORE.
AND I THINK I JUST NEED TO KEEP
THINKING ABOUT IT.
AS MUCH AS I'D LIKE TO THINK
THAT FERGUSON COULD BE A GAME
CHANGING MOMENT, IT'S HARD FOR
ME TO PUT FAITH IN THAT.
THIS PERPETUAL, ASPIRATIONAL
HOPE OF JUSTICE THAT KEEPS NOT
HAPPENING.
IT BUILDS UP IN THE SELF.
AND IT'S FASCINATING TO ME THAT
I KEEP HAVING THE HOPE AND KEEP
KNOWING IT'S NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THOUSANDS OF AMERICANS MARCHED
IN CITIES NATIONWIDE, POURING
OUT FRUSTRATION THAT
A WHITE POLICEMAN IN NEW YORK
WON'T BE INDICTED IN THE DEATH
OF A BLACK SUSPECT LAST SUMMER.
AND THE U.S. MILITARY ANNOUNCED
REPORTS OF SEXUAL ASSAULTS IN
THE RANKS ROSE EIGHT PERCENT
THIS YEAR.
AND, MORE THAN 60% OF WOMEN WHO
FILED REPORTS SAID THEY FACED
RETALIATION
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, CAPTURING THE PEOPLE AND
PLACES OF THE DEEP SOUTH.
A NASHVILLE PHOTOGRAPHER USES
IMAGES TO OPEN DIALOGUE ABOUT
RACE RELATIONS AND SOUTHERN
IDENTITY.
SEE WORKS FROM HER SERIES,
"SOUTHERN ROUTE," ON ART BEAT.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCES HIS PICK TO HEAD THE
PENTAGON.
I'M GWEN IFILL, WE'LL SEE YOU
ON-LINE, AND AGAIN HERE TOMORROW
EVENING WITH MARK SHIELDS AND
DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.